the more people uh refer to the science
the more you should suspect that they
are engaged in some crazy religious
activity this kind of wrongheadedness
leads to all kinds of policy errors
because people have focused on the
satisfaction of asceticism it's very
significant that in our lifetimes
governments have got worse at dealing
with disasters not better despite the
accumulation of scientific knowledge we
seem somehow uh collectively to be worse
at scientific
[Music]
thinking hello everyone watching and
listening today I'm speaking with
historian and author Neil Ferguson we
haven't spoken before although I've
wanted to for a long time we discussed
the historical and deeply myth ological
president of world-ending narratives how
the global doomsday ethos abdicates
local responsibility while empowering
the Elite Class the outof control
gigantism plaguing our administrative
States today and how we might strive as
individuals to deal with the genuine
tragedy of Life morally humbly and
religiously so I was reviewing your book
Doom this morning and I've been wanting
to talk to you about it for a long time
I'm I'm very interested
in the apocalyptic vision and
its implications for
political organization and and
psychological organization as well and I
thought I'd just start with a couple of
comments to get us
going the Apocalypse in some ways is
always upon us and you write about that
in your book I mean because people might
ask well why has mankind always been
consumed at the narrative level with
Notions of the end of the world and the
answer to that is at least in part
because we always
inhabit demarcated conceptual worlds and
even embodied worlds and all of those
worlds do come to an end and so the idea
that there's a universal end is built
into the Fab of reality and it's
something that we have to permanently
contend with and so it's there as a
lurking existential Abyss but it's also
there as a practical problem that we
have to contend with and the grand
apocalyptic Visions The Book of
Revelation for example are in part
attempts to structure our apprehension
of
the what would you say the Eternal
apocalypse and to also help us determine
practically and politically how that
might be at least staved off although
perhaps even managed more
comprehensively and so I guess I'm
curious like why did you why did your
interests do you think coales around the
conception of Doom and it's been a
couple of years now since this book was
published how have your conceptions
changed and and what did you learn as a
consequence of investigating
this narrative Trope so deeply
there's a great sketch uh in the Beyond
The
Fringe album which uh goes right back to
Peter Kook and and Dudley Moore uh
Jonathan Miller and Alan Bennett in the
1960s uh and the sketch is the end of
the world and it's essentially a sect of
millenarians who gather on a hill to
anticipate the end of the world uh they
have a long and quite amusing discussion
about what it's likely to involve will
will the veil of the temple be rent
aunder and the the time comes they they
count down to the end of the world and
nothing happens and Peter Cook who's the
leader of the sect ends the sketch by
well never mind lad same time next week
and I always thought that was very funny
U because the end of the world has been
consistently
overpredicted by human beings for
Millennia uh we're fascinated by the
idea the end of the world and I think
it's for a slightly different reason
from the one that you
hypothesized we have the reality uh that
we as individuals end to contend with uh
that that's just uh one of the Givens of
of human life uh even for billionaires
in Silicon Valley right now the end of
uh their individual lives is inevitable
and that's really the hard hardest thing
to deal with about life that it
ends and we also know how it ends we
know what that's like because some time
or another in our lives we encounter
death the death of a grandparent a
parent of a friend we also see things
being destroyed we see buildings uh
collapse or Bridges uh we see fires
consume areas of Woodland so we know
what dissolution looks like not just for
us as individuals but we know what it
looks like like for expanses of land or
or edifices and I think we therefore
infer the consoling thought that it's
all going to go down in flames uh at
some uh future date and and the great
monotheistic religions have as one of
their centerpieces the the end of the
world it's it's there in Islam as well
as in uh
Christianity uh and I think it's also
exciting I think we find the end of the
world uh kind of in cinematic Prospect
which is why there are so many movies
about it as well as works of Science
Fiction so we're fascinated by the end
of the world because it's clearly a
spectacular Prospect but it's also
consoling to us we may die as
individuals but everything's going down
at some point and the issue is when so
uh many uh Christians uh at successive
periods in the history of Christianity
have anticipated quite an imminent end
of the world um and and of course
they're always disappointed like Peter
Cook and Dudley Moore so so the
consoling issue I mean the easy read on
that I suppose is that the end of the
world is the precondition for the
establishment of an Ever more glorious
paradise and you can understand a
consolation in that but you're pointing
to a different kind of consolation I
suppose which is it seems to me correct
me if I'm wrong that something like shod
and Freud is that the fact that we end
is easier to swallow
if we understand it in relationship to
the potential end of everything so I I
don't exactly understand why you why you
highlighted consolation I can see it in
in the heavenly vision let's say
post-apocalypse but you're you seem to
be pointing to something else well of
course uh religion uh offers an
afterlife uh that will be better and
Resurrection in uh in the case of uh the
the great monotheistic religions but
don't think that's always what's in
people's minds when they contemplate uh
the end of the world I was very struck
as I was researching the book how many
times in the midst of a localized
disaster uh individuals said it felt
like the end of the world so when you're
in the midst of a massive configration
uh the biggest wild far in US history or
when you're uh in London during the
Blitz when you were in the midst of some
localized disaster it seems somehow
consoling to say oh it's it's clearly
the end of the world so I don't think
it's just that people say and therefore
I can look forward to being reunited
with my ancestors in some happy
afterlife I think there's just a sense
that if everybody's going down that
doesn't make it quite so bad as if it's
just me well you know that there might
be another element to it as well I mean
I'm think I the the Terminator movie
series came to mind when when you were
walking
through your discussion I suppose in
reference to the science fiction
representations of the end of the world
and all of our conceptual schemes when
they encounter an obstacle undergo a
collapse into a kind of chaos and then a
potential regeneration and that's the St
same as a stage transition in pedian
child development and it's the same as
the Scientific Revolution and Every Act
of learning is is simultaneously the
death of some set of preconceptions and
there's pain in that which is partly why
we don't like to have our ideas
challenge but you know there's also
Adventure in it and part of the reason
that people do go to watch movies like
The Terminator and the plethora of end
of the of the world movies that do make
themselves manifest is because I think
we can see in the confrontation with
cataclysm um an adventure I mean that's
what people are doing in a theater when
they're watching the Terminator series I
mean it's it's a dreadful Adventure but
it's a total Adventure it's completely
engrossing and it might be that you
could imagine and I think that this is
part of the emphasis of the
judeo-christian notion of ultimate
sacrifice you could
imagine welcoming the apocalyptic
reality of the world with open arms
being willing to undergo that adventure
of continual death and transformation
and that transforming it that
entire death and rebirth process into
something like the most exciting
possible Adventure I mean you know what
what you do see in the biblical Corpus
there's always a wrestling with the
apocalyptic reality of existence
socially and individually and there
is the insistence throughout the text
that the appropriate way to deal with
that is not to run from it or deny it
but to really to the degree that it's
possible to welcome it with with open
arms now that's a very tricky thing to
manage obviously the the death how do
you welcome the death of everything with
open arms but in some ways it doesn't
matter because it's a reality that
people have to face I think what's
fascinating about the Book of Revelation
is that it it it's so spectacular uh it
it's an
extraordinary uh
visualization of of of a cataclysm and
it's it's really very elaborate it's
worth it's worth reading and trying to
picture it in your mind and you realize
that you would need the most advanced uh
computer Graphics to to realize it on a
on a screen I think it's partly that you
need a spectacular prelude for the
kingdom of God to be plausible because
the terrible truth about the kingdom of
God is that it does sound quite
dull uh I mean the reality about the the
the Saints and and angels and and God
himself is that they don't really know
how to throw a party
and we need more than uh than that to
excite us so I think that the apocalypse
is attractive because it's so much more
exciting uh than the ultimate outcome
the utopian outcome of Heaven now what's
interesting about science fiction is
that it really discards Utopia there's
some Utopia in science fiction but most
of it's dystopian and you gave the
example of the Terminator movie series
that's part of a long tradition of
visualizing an end of the world which is
dystopian where an apocalyptic event
occurs and all you really left with in
the case of the Terminator movies is a a
pile of rubble in which a few surviving
humans are picked off by Killer
Robots the interesting thing to me about
science fiction is that from its birth
in the early 19th century as a genre it
provides the apocalypse without the
prospect of some Ultimate Reign uh of
God and and the Saints and we find that
hugely exciting so the Paradox at the
heart of the book is that we spend a lot
of time thinking about the end of the
world of course environmentalists are
the latest heirs to the millenarian
tradition they love to say that the
world is about to end it's in 12 years
it must be now eight years and counting
that's part of a long tradition where
secular movements Embrace often
unwittingly religious ideas about the
impending uh apocalypse
and that's exciting to people so they're
drawn to it Greta tunberg is just the
latest profit of the of the Millenium
and I I think that's a a very important
reason to be skeptical about stories
about the end of the world because while
we spend a lot of time discussing the
end of the world in its latest
Incarnation a catastrophic climate uh
scenario we kind of miss the much more
likely smaller scale mediumsized
disasters the key point the book makes
is we're getting worse at handling those
so we spend ages talking about the end
of the world endless conferences on
climate change and the apocalypse and we
utterly bungle or what was in fact not a
particularly disastrous pandemic and
we're we're going to bungle our way
through some geopolitical disasters
we're we're doing that right now I think
that's the critical argument of the book
and that's why the subtitle of the book
is so important the politics of
catastrophe the key argument the book
makes is that that most disasters
shouldn't be thought of as either
natural or man-made disasters happen and
then we as a species collectively bungle
them or not and that's the the critical
point disasters are in many ways
politically determined even if their
Origins are natural so that's the
argument of the
book as a holiday season unfolds it's a
time of Joy gratitude and reflection in
the midst of all these festivities
consider taking a moment to reflect on
the digital footprint that accompanies
you through the season think about all
the information on your phone from
anything you search your location to the
websites you shop at and more companies
can legally gather this information and
sell your data for profit that's why you
need to do what I do and keep your data
private with expressvpn expressvpn is an
app on your phone and computer that
encrypts all of your online traffic so
whatever you do stays private if you
think incognito mode will stop people
from track tracking your online activity
think again when you read the fine print
that appears when you start browsing in
incognito mode it says that your
activity might still be visible to your
employer your school or your internet
service provider without expressvpn
every site you visit could be logged by
the Admin of that Network we love using
expressvpn because of how easy it is to
use the app has one button once you turn
it on you're protected from prying eyes
the daily wire has partnered with
expressvpn to get you a special holiday
offer go to expressvpn.com / Jordan
right now and get three extra months
free go to expressvpn.com Jordan right
now and get three extra months free
that's
expressvpn.com Jordan expressvpn.com
Jordan to learn
more okay so there's three themes there
that I'd like to to expound upon so the
first is you you you interestingly
pointed out that the dystopia and the
apocalypse is more interesting than the
the the subsequent
heaven and that's the problem with
socialist visions of Utopia that people
like dovi laid out in the late
1800s know in in Notes from Underground
dovi famously pointed out that if we did
bring about the Socialist Utopia and he
described that as the endless
opportunity to sit in pools of bubbling
water busy ourselves with the
continuation of the species and eat
Nothing But Cake that human beings would
break it all into a chaotic mess at the
first opportunity just so that something
exciting could happen and so there's
there's the problem with a A satiation V
vision of heaven so that would be a
vision where everyone has everything
they need all the time is that precisely
when when you do that with an infant or
when you enter that state after
Thanksgiving dinner Christmas dinner all
you do is go to sleep there's no reason
to be conscious Consciousness demands
something like an adventure and the
classic vision of Heaven does seem
lacking in that it isn't obvious what
you would do there so that's something
we could delve into then you pointed out
that one of the additional underground
advantages to being an apocalyptic
doomsayer is that you can I'm I'm
modifying your argument slightly but
that you can present yourself as the
ultimate
virtue seeking Redeemer by claiming to
be obsessed by nothing but large-scale
disaster you can construe yourself as
virtuous because of the depth of your
concern and you can abdicate your
responsibility to actually deal with
less
self-dramatizing problems with the less
self-dramatizing problems that actually
constitute problems you could solve and
address if you put your mind to it in
the real world you know and there's
there's psychological reasons for
assuming one of the things you see when
people's lives go seriously astray is
that they don't generally people
generally don't run off a cliff
immediately after doing brilliantly what
happens is they make one error and then
they make a more serious error and then
they repeat that 10,000 times and then
they're in hell and they're
it was their failure to rectify the mini
crisis all along the way that brings
upon the Apocalypse in their life and I
do see a lot of that political posturing
characterizing the modern world you know
that people act out the role of world
redeeming savior but they're not
actually attending to genuine problems
that are right in front of them that
they could address if they acted
responsibly and then the final theme you
develop veled you said this is very
interesting you said that
there's that the notion of natural
disaster in some sense is ill
conceptualized
because there's there's a ambiguity
about whether when a disaster occurs
it's a consequence of the hand of God
say in the earthquake or the flood or
the utter failure of the authorities to
have prepared properly for a foreseeable
disaster know I thought this very
clearly when Katrina hit New Orleans
because a Hu and cry went up about the
catastrophe of the natural disaster but
you didn't have to dig very far before
you realized that the reason that that
hurricane was so devastating in New
Orleans was because well the dkes hadn't
been maintained and they'd only been
built to withstand a one in one century
flood and that the entire infrastructure
of the society was corrupt and so you
know in in mythological representations
in deep narratives there is an identity
between the evil king and the wicked
queen of nature they're the same thing
and so if the king gets Wicked enough
the evil queen of nature arises and
that's a representation of the fact that
if your state is corrupt natural
disaster will definitely make itself
shown and that you actually can't
distinguish There's no distinction
between lack of preparation and a
natural disaster in the final analysis
and Corruption and blindness facilitate
that that
Nexus so the Egyptians had a story it's
the story upon which their whole culture
was funded that the state corrupted
that's Osiris the state corrupted and
became willfully blind as it
aged and then it was overthrown by
that's Osiris is overthrown by Seth
who's the precursor of Satan and then he
rules so now the Tyrant rules and then
Isis who's the queen of the underworld
she's nature she makes herself known
again chaos right with enough
disintegration at the sociological level
then chaos makes itself manifest again
it's one of the most ancient stories of
mankind playing out that dichotomy
between the Tyrant and natural disaster
that you just described let me take
those points in order if I if I can I
think the the most interesting thing to
me about uh fantasies about the end of
the world uh about the various
millenarian Cults through history is
that uh they are often accompanied by
certain forms of of behavior that one
might characterize as athetic so the
aestheticism is an important part of uh
Many religious and secular movements so
the the end is approaching uh the the
apocalypse is nearing and therefore we
should fast or perhaps even flog
ourselves uh like the flagellant orders
at the time of the black death and it
seemed to me very interesting uh how
many uh similar patterns one one could
see in in our time whether you are
preoccupied with uh climate change or
systemic racism doesn't matter you
should engage in some kind kind of atic
atonement uh in advance of the great
Reckoning uh and and this I think
infests a lot of of contemporary
progressivism uh the desire to eat uh uh
rabbit food uh to be constantly uh
trying to eliminate things from one's uh
diet the desire to uh engage in uh uh uh
abstention from reproduction we mustn't
have children because climate change is
so cataclysmic and so you have these
sorts of aesthetic behaviors which you
can find in in medieval and ancient
religion so I think that's an important
first point the second point is that
mythology uh of the sort you described
in the case of the ancient Egyptian
myths uh makes a lot of sense if you
imagine yourself uh living in the uh
prehistoric or very ancient world life
expectancy was very short uh individuals
were extraordinary at risk uh from a
whole variety of of premature uh forms
of mortality and the natural world was
deeply mysterious because there was no
scientific framework for understanding
uh anything the the fluctuations in the
level of the River Nile uh the periodic
droughts uh that Afflicted uh uh early
agricultural societies and so you end up
with ways of of making sense of an
extraordinar cruel and capricious world
uh so I think that's that's an important
reason uh why myths uh persist they're
deeply rooted in our in our premodern uh
experience um and I think that uh if one
tries to think about our present
predicament uh it's odd that such things
have such enduring power over us because
since the Scientific Revolution and the
enlightenment we we have a much better
handle uh on the challenges uh that a
species like ours faces uh on a planet
like ours so what's odd is that despite
having really quite a good understanding
of say infectious disease or the the
ways that hurricans uh strike the
Eastern Seaboard of the United States we
seem to be getting worse
at handling pandemics and hurricans and
that's a really important argument that
the book makes compared with the
generation of the
1950s the generation of of the 2010s and
2020s seems really quite bad at disaster
Management in most western societies not
only the United States and it's
explaining that that takes us into new
territory because I don't think you can
explain the diminishing competence of
the modern State without having a theory
of its degeneration
and that's something that that is a
really important part of the book okay
so I want to pick up on two of those
topics so the first is you point out
that as the apop apocalyptic Vision
predominates there's a turn to
asceticism and then you describe we
could say veganism and vegetarianism and
well and the insistence by the
environmentalists that we must engage in
degrowth and that we must reduce our
standard of living and
and yes okay but there's there's a very
interesting psychological rationale for
that as well which is
that if the old state of being has
become
corrupt so that's the old King and now
we're threatened by its
collapse then the proper thing to do is
to engage
in Repentance and atonement because what
you want to do
is you want to offer up your stupid
preconceptions to be destroyed so that
you can rectify the corruption so that
you can Stave off the disaster and
so now it's interesting a because with
the millenarian and apocalyptic
movements on the left you have a
simultaneous insistence that all sorts
of impulsive pleasure seeking licentious
Behavior should be centered and
prioritized and celebrated but at the
same time you have this insistence that
there's a certain kind of aestheticism
that's also necessary and I see in that
as a psychologist I see that as a a
proper mechanism of repair gone astray
right is that well you should always
be cutting back in this aesthetic way on
your idiot excesses locally to improve
the manner in which conceptualize the
world that's the continual sacrificial
offering of your own insufficiency and
your own stupidity and that does renew
the world and so but now we've got this
Dynamic where we globalize the
apocalypse we view the end of the world
we assume that nothing but a kind of
universal asceticism and atonement will
suffice that enables us to set local
concerns aside as we already discussed
and to act irresponsibly and maybe
that's part of
what's producing this inability to
actually
respond you know locally and effectively
to genuine problems you know in in the
Old Testament there's a the second
commandment is to not use God's name in
vain and what that means as far as I can
tell is that you shouldn't claim Divine
motivation for doing things that are
actually self-serving right you
shouldn't attribute sacred motivations
to your own to your own instrumental
impulsive and self-serving behavior and
then that's echoed in the New Testament
with the insistence that you shouldn't
pray in public now if you take on the
apocalyptic burden and you're virtuous
only in consequence of your
compassionate concern it gives you a
perfect excuse to dispense with local
responsibility and if you dispense with
local responsibility then you're no
longer able to engage in the concrete
problem solving activities of the sort
that you described I mean what did you
conclude when you're I mean you have a
chapter on developing political
incompetence and also one on you know a
sort of a belief in scientism and that
seems to me to be part of your attempt
to assess the local failure while we're
concentrating on the global apocalypse
and so what what do you make of that
that concatenation of causal forces
there are two things that that are going
on I think one is is that uh the more
people uh refer to the science the more
you should suspect that they are engaged
in some quasi religious activity uh
because the notion of some settled body
of knowledge called the science is is at
odds with the reality of the scientific
method which is a constant struggle uh
to falsify hypotheses through
experimentation uh during the covid-19
pandemic but I think predates it it was
already going on and debates about
climate there was a lot of spurious
invocation of the science and one might
as well have been saying the gods or the
the deity because it was in fact uh
quite un unscientific thinking that was
going on I'll give you an illustration
of this uh a great delusion is to
imagine that we can prevent the rise of
average temperatures by large scale
asceticism in the west uh we must give
up internal combustion engines uh we
should give up eating meat and so on if
we end up buying electric vehicles and
solar cells manufactured in China with
electricity generated by burning ever
larger quantities of coal the
probability of of reducing uh average
temperatures is zero uh because that
that is in fact the the the perfect
illustration of of wrong-headed
in in action uh if one accepts the
premises of uh the debates on the causes
of rising temperatures it makes no sense
at all uh for us to behave this way our
our asceticism will make no difference
if if it manifests itself as increased
burning of coal in China so that that's
the first thing that's going on I mean
like ger well or increased burning in
coal in Germany because that's what's
happened with the Green Revolution in
Germany ex they shut off the nuclear
plants and started up the LI night
so this this kind of this kind of
wrongheadedness leads to all kinds of
policy errors because people have
focused on the satisfaction of
asceticism The Virtue signaling that
comes with getting rid of uh nuclear
power stations or internal combustion
engines so there's a kind of generalized
failure which Embraces the policy Elite
to think rationally about the problems
that we're trying to address the second
problem which I think is just as
important is the way the administrative
State functions if you compare Central
governments today with their
counterparts of half a century or 70
years ago they've become much larger
they bloated in terms of the numbers of
people employed uh they intervene in
many more ways that an enormous uh
there's an enormous Corpus of regulation
in all uh Western countries and this
administrative State unwieldy uh
regulatory is very inefficient it's very
bad at achieving intended goals and I
that has to do with the way that
bureaucracy works and the sclerotic
tendencies that the modern State suffers
from so between the science as a quasi
uh religious way of thinking and the
administrative State we have a very very
dysfunctional approach to nearly all the
problems that confront us and that is
really the central argument of Doom it's
very significant that in our lifetimes
governments have got worse at dealing
with disasters not better despite the
accumulation of scientific knowledge we
seem somehow uh collectively to be worse
at scientific
thinking the holidays are rapidly
approaching but we can find peace and
calm in the craziness of the season with
hallow the number one Christian Prayer
app in the world immerse yourself in
Christmas in Advent prayers meditations
and peaceful Christmas music hallow also
offers an extensive library of Bible
reading plans accompanied by insightful
Reflections and audio Ed meditations
whether you're a seasoned Bible reader
or just starting your journey Hall
provides a platform for you to engage
with scripture like never before a great
place to start is with father Mike
schmitz's Bible in a year in which he
offers brief daily readings and
Reflections available on the Hallow app
the hall app also helps you connect with
a community of like-minded individuals
sharing experiences insights and
encouragement along the path to
spiritual growth this Christmas join
Hallow's Christmas prayer challenge
Advent with CS Lewis for the 25 days
leading up to to Christmas you can focus
on the real reason for the season with
prayer meditation and Christmas music on
hallow download the app for free at
hall.com Jordan for 3 months free that's
hall.com
[Music]
Jordan okay so okay so imagine imagine
this you magnify the size of the
Apocalypse right so it becomes a
world-ending
Ragnarok then you magnify the size of
the bureaucrat State because you have to
in order to deal with that apocalypse
okay then because the state is so Global
and large and so Central it loses its
connection with the real world it has no
subsidiary organization and then it
flails about pointlessly now I'm going
to walk through a couple of narrative
representations of that and it'll tie it
back to the imagery of Revelation you
might find this interesting so you see
that Dynamic play out in the opening
chapters of Genesis because what you
have is the descendants of Cain so Cain
makes improper sacrifices and he becomes
bitter and resentful and he turns to
technology it's Cain's descendants that
turn to technology first they build the
first cities and then the city becomes
corrupt it becomes corrupt in the
direction of the Tower of Babel now the
Tower of Babel is a zigurat right it's a
it's a stepped pyramid and at that time
the potentates of the Middle East were
competing to build the largest ziggurats
they were trying to build towers to
heaven to glorify themselves and that's
the subtext of the Tower of Babel story
so what happens is that an the ultimate
Tower of Babel is erected to reach to
the sky and that's a challenge to the
supremacy of God and the consequence of
that is
that the cosmos the spirit of the cosmos
the
creative in producer of the
cosmos makes all those who inhabit the
tower unable to communicate with one
another so they start to lose even the
ability to share Concepts and this
structure collapses and it's because
that Tower of Babel is too large it
reaches too high it's too uniform and
it's destined to failure of course that
begs the question you know what's the
alternative to that but I would say the
entire remaining biblical Corpus is
actually an attempt to answer that
question but it's very germine now that
imagery is picked up again in the Book
of
Revelation so one of the central images
in the book that I think is very
relevant imagine that the Book of
Revelation is trying to
conceptualize the apocalypse as such the
manner in which things
deteriorate before the ultimate disaster
and so one of the main images is of a
seven-headed
beast and on the back of the Beast is
the of
Babylon
and what H it what it it's an image of
a centralizing state a centralizing mon
a monstrous centralizing State that's a
good way of thinking about it with
multiple
heads with something like disin disin
disinhibited Lous as its partner that's
the image and so the notion there is
that when things deteriorate to the
point where apocalypse is likely you
have the construction of
monstrous state likee apparatuses
aligned with individual fragmentation
down to the point of Lous atomization
that's a good way of thinking about it
so you know you're you're striving
towards it seems to me in your argument
you're striving towards the hypothesis
that there's something like an outof
contr control
gigantism
that's that's a that's a causal that's
causally related to the inability of
these bureaucratic organizations to
actually respond to actual occurrences
in the world so two two thoughts uh
there's only one law of History I'm I'm
a historian uh and that's the law of
unintended consequences and so what
typically happens is that
well-intentioned people come to power
identify a problem which they they feel
they must address and they undertake
measures uh to address the problem which
have unintended consequences this was
true when back in the 1960s and70s
people persuaded themselves that there
was a terrible problem of overpopulation
that malus was going to be Vindicated
and therefore there had to be drastic
population control especially in Asia
and that turned out to of all kinds of
unintended consequences in our time uh
fears not just of uh climate change but
of uh dangerous technological
developments have given rise to a view
which my friend Nick Bostrom and Oxford
exemplifies that we need to have very
very powerful surveillance powers to
prevent bad things uh from happening
whether it's to prevent uh CO2 emissions
uh uh in breaching uh the levels of the
Net Zero program or whether it's to stop
dangerous research being done with
artificial intelligence we we need to
empower the state to have even greater
powers of surveillance than the mid 20th
century totalitarian regimes had and so
one of the key arguments in the book
Doom is that actually totalitarianism is
the thing most to be feared in the 20th
century totalitarian regimes cause way
more premature death than anything else
and so the last thing we should want to
do in the 21st century is to create new
forms of totalitarianism out of a belief
that only an allseeing State can prevent
disaster so this is a really really
important argument that that the book
makes and I think it's become even more
relevant with the major breakthroughs
we've seen in artificial intelligence in
the two years
since the book uh was published the
other thing that I would say is we want
the universe to be moral uh we are very
strongly inclined to think when bad
things happen to us that they may in
fact be retribution for sins that we
committed in the past and uh even the
most rational uh individual is
susceptible to this idea I I know this
because my parents did the very best
their very best to raise me as a product
of the Scottish Enlightenment uh an
atheist and a devoted believer in the
scientific method but when bad things
happen I have this uneasy sense that I
may have brought it upon myself uh by
transgressing in some way illustrating
that uh you can't really escape the
Christian Legacy unless you uh travel a
very long long way away from from uh
post-christian civilizations now it's
not in fact a moral Universe this the
bad news uh it's really not I mean a lot
of the bad things that happen are random
uh uh they're governed by power laws
they're extremely difficult to predict
uh Wars are in fact pretty randomly
distributed there's no cycle of history
that tells you when a war is coming same
applies to financial crisis wildfires
and earthquakes are not normally
distributed they can't really be thought
of in probabilistic Terms and so much of
the terrible stuff that happens to us
has nothing to do uh with uh there being
a moral Universe cancer May strike one
of us down in a much shorter time frame
than we are both tly assuming we have
and and if we are diagnosed with a a
terminal cancer uh how will we react to
that news what if I hear this tomorrow
uh it'll it'll be a tremendous shock to
me mainly because uh it will it will
render my younger children much more
vulnerable in my absence but will I be
able to resist the Temptation that I
brought it upon myself it'll be there in
the back of my mind because I've just
inherited uh from Generations that way
of thinking and it's worth adding one
little footnote to this uh my friend the
historian Tom Holland wrote a nice book
recently Dominion arguing that uh
Christian ways of thinking about the
world have outlived Christianity in
these secular uh times that we inhabit a
very good illustration of this point
is how much Calvinism is still out there
the belief that you belong to the elect
uh the people because of predestination
who are insured of Salvation is a very
powerful one and it persists long after
people have ceased to attend calvinist
uh church services I'm always impressed
by uh the presence of the self-appointed
elect in academic life people who have a
sense that they are morally Superior to
those around them they they do belong to
an elite and their behavior uh should be
uh as it were fitting to that
preeminence uh now I I am a kind of
calvinist atheist I come from the west
of Scotland where that kind of thinking
was very well established now I can see
the people who think they belong uh to
the elect all around me uh in American
academic life and of course the critical
idea which Robert L Stevenson gets at in
the master of balant tree and uh and
James hog gets and the Confessions of a
Justified sinner is that the elect are
the worst people it's the people who
think that they belong uh to the elite
who turn out to be capable of the most
diabolical acts so you know if you have
that feeling that you might belong to
the elect uh disabuse yourself of that
notion because it often empowers
Dreadful acts of
Cruelty starting a business can be tough
especially knowing how to run your
online storefront they than to Shopify
it's easier than ever Shopify is the
global Commerce platform that helps you
sell at every stage of your business
from the launch your online shop stage
all the way to the did we just hit a
million orders stage Shopify is there to
help you grow our marketing team uses
Shopify every day to sell our
merchandise and we love how easy it is
to add more items ship products and
track conversions Shopify helps you turn
browsers into buyers with the internet's
best converting checkout up to 36%
better compared to other leading
Commerce platforms no matter how big you
want to grow Shopify gives you
everything you need to take control and
take your business to the next level
sign up for a $1 per month trial period
at shopify.com
jbp go to shopify.com jbp now to grow
your business no matter what stage
you're at that's shopify.com
[Music]
jbp I presume that's why the gospel en
Joiner is that the last will be first
right and the first will be last it's
pointing to something like that there's
a couple of themes you developed
so you pointed out that it's often the
reaction to a crisis that's worse than
the crisis and you pointed to the law of
unintended consequences as the cause of
that and and that's I think there's
something technically true about that in
that there is an a very large number of
possible consequences of Any Given Act
and the probability that you can specify
the consequence you want and only that
consequence diminishes with the
complexity of the
action okay so and you know you can see
even systems as sophisticated as the
immune system falling prey to the law of
unintended consequences because
sometimes people die when they're
infected by an organism because the
immune system overreacts and the covid
overreaction was was a generalized
social immune system overreaction and it
was much worse than the the the
hypothetical crisis itself now but what
I wanted to focus on was the reason that
that overreach
occurs now I'm going to I I've been
writing a book about biblical narratives
so they're very much on my mind and
that's partly why I'm bringing them up
but I talked to a good friend of mine
and his brother Jonathan peio and and
Matthew pagio about the first Cataclysm
the first apocalyptic cataclysm as it's
laid out in the Book of Genesis and
that's the sin of Eve and the consequent
sin of Adam and their view is that the
sin of Eve is one of pride is that she
encounters the serpent who turns out to
be Satan so it's it's it's it's it's the
possibility of predation and natural
catastrophe allied with the possibility
of evil that's a good way of thinking
about it so symbolically and her first
presumption is that she can Encompass
that and hearken to it and listen to its
voice and integrate it and that's what
produces the fall and Adam's consequent
sin is he agrees with Eve and I would
say mostly to try to impress her which
speaks very deeply to the motivation of
men and so there's this notion it's a
very very interesting notion and I I'd
like to know what you make of it is that
the fundamental reason that cataclysms
occur and I guess this is an an
objection to your theory of an amoral
world so we'll see where this goes is
that it's people's overreaching Pride
that is the Eternal precursor to the
fall you know Pride goes before a fall
but it's this notion that we can bite
off more than we can chew that we can
encapsulate and control more than than
are we're really competent to we have an
overexpansion vision of our competence
we trumpet that to parade our moral V
virtue it motivates us to overextend
ourselves in places we shouldn't and the
con constant consequence of that is the
is systemic collapse you know at
different scales and so it begs the
question you know I've really wondered
about this and you know if you I think
it's something to meditate
on if you didn't overreach in your life
you know if you if you were properly
humble in your claims of Mastery if you
only dealt what was what was with what
was local and that was within your
bounds of competence you know maybe
extending yourself a bit to
learn maybe you wouldn't bring on
yourself a continual sequence of
relatively apocalyptic catastrophes
right it's like and and you pointed to
that at the end of your last sequence of
comments you know you said there's a
tension there you said well the universe
is full of random events and it's not
essentially moral but you also said But
we overreach constantly and that does
produce you know various forms of
cataclysm so I would say see there's a
there's a paradox in those two
viewpoints because how about this is how
about our immorality makes us more
susceptible to the random fluctuations
of the world right that joins those two
visions together I think it's rather
rather different from the way you've put
it it's often people with a strong sense
of of
morality who
overreach humility is important we need
to be humble about our ability to
predict the consequences of our actions
it's a nonlinear world but we are quite
linear thinkers and we love to say other
things being equal this act will have
the following
consequence uh but of course other
things are not equal u in a complex
system let me give you an illustration
of this point uh which is currently uh
in people's minds because of the success
of the movie
Oppenheimer uh Opie Oppenheimer was a
very moral individual at least he felt
himself to be uh rooted in in an ethical
education that he'd had an at an elite
school in New York drawn out of uh those
ethical uh those ethnical premises
towards uh communism in the
1930s uh but when given the challenge to
build an atomic bomb in order to win
World War II uh he embraced that
challenge and and achieved it with
astonishing Brilliance Brilliance both
as a scientist and as it turned out as a
leader of scientists but he quickly
began to see after the bomb had been
dropped on Hiroshima and nagas Aki that
there were unintended
consequences uh he was unable to prevent
the arms race that soon uh broke out
between the United States and the Soviet
Union he was unable to prevent the
invention of the thermonuclear bomb the
super uh he lost the arguments uh about
the uh development of of nuclear weapons
and if one looks back at that era the
the the single most amazing thing to me
about that breakthrough is that we have
sub quently made so much more use of the
destructive potential of nuclear fish
than of its productive potential we've
built many many more nuclear warheads
than nuclear reactors that illustrates I
think very powerfully the law of
unintended consequences but it began
with an individual uh Oppenheimer who
was filled with a sense of his own
morality and and took that sense uh with
him to the Grave right okay but but but
maybe that okay but but you're pointing
to something there that that that is
akin to a point you made earlier is that
you said you know that he was filled
with a sense of his own morality and
that and I can understand why that might
be associated with the totalitarian
temptation of religious dogmatism and
Calvinism let's say but I could say
perhaps I could say in response he
should have been filled instead with a
sense of his own potential sinfulness
right and I would also say that and you
can tell me what you think about this
because these are ideas that I'm just
you know trying to develop is that you
already told me that as far as you're
concerned it's the very people who
regard themselves as the elect and the
saved and the already moral who are who
are most likely to overreach and Who
present the biggest danger you follow
that up with the description of
Oppenheimer right this incredible
luciferian intellect and that's the
proper symbolic representation who
engaged in this world destroying scheme
and then was potentially World
destroying scheme and was was unable to
control it but you characterized him as
convinced of his own moral virtue so I
would say okay well if that's the
problem maybe he should have been
convinced of the opposite of that which
would be his intrinsic insufficiency and
sinfulness now there is an continual
injunction throughout the biblical
Corpus to do precisely that and the
reason I'm bringing that up too is
because something else that you said
begs a question you know if if the law
of unintended consequence
rules then under what conditions is
action any action not overreach right
because you could say this is combinant
oal explosion you can't predict the
consequence of any action and yet you
have to act and so then that the
question emerges well since you have to
act but there's the danger of
exponentially cascading unintended
consequences in what Spirit should you
act and you've already pointed out well
it shouldn't be in the spirit of smug
self-satisfied calvinistic dogmatic
certainty in your moral right well then
what should it be well hopefully it
should be the opposite of that you know
and and that is a kind of radical
humility right it's it's an openness to
the possibility of error I mean I I
don't know exactly how those things
should be calibrated but because we do
have to act and it does seem to me that
there is a domain of action like what do
you think it was that open Heimer did
wrong fundamentally I mean I
characterize his intellect as luciferian
right it's he's reaching he's reaching
for a power that in in principle I don't
know if it should have been forever off
limits I I have no idea how to
adjudicate that but you have a sense
that Oppenheimer himself recognized that
he had it was it that he had too much
faith in the comprehensiveness of his
intellect that he was too tempted by the
power that was offered to him as a
consequence of being developer of the of
this immense weapon where do you think
he went wrong I haven't that's key to
the question of where science itself
goes wrong I should be clear I haven't
watched the movie but I read the the
book American Prometheus I I prefer
books to movies and the book uh makes it
clear that what Oppenheimer got wrong
was uh to flirt with Communism and and
that was wrong because it was the moment
when he set aside uh his scientific
judgment and uh and drank at least some
of the snake oil uh that the Soviet
regime was successfully exporting uh in
the 1930s this was a terrible mistake
that ultimately undermined his
credibility and limited his power to to
steer the course of uh of the nuclear
race uh what he got right was to to
develop a bomb that could end World War
II without the need for a large scale
conventional forces in invasion of Japan
which would have cost Untold numbers of
American uh soldiers lives uh and I
think it's very important to emphasize
that if Oppenheimer had said to himself
I must be humble and resist the
temptation to win this uh this race and
of course a number of physicists did
take that view and refused to
participate in the manhand project it
might have been disastrous I constantly
try to remind people uh in the work I've
done on the second world war that the
axess powers the totalitarian Powers
nearly won that war and it took
tremendous creativity by a whole range
of scientists not only Oppenheimer but
think of Turing those uh cryptographers
who did such crucial job of making sure
that uh the Allied pars cracked the
axess pars codes it took a huge effort
to to win that war the critical thing I
think comes from from another uh secular
Jewish intellect uh Henry Kissinger
whose biography I've spent a large part
of my career writing in the 1950s and
60s Kissinger before he entered the
realm of power came up with the idea of
the problem of conjecture uh it's an
extremely important idea that should be
communicated to any decision maker
whether they're in the private sector or
the public sector and the problem of
conjecture says that at any given moment
when one must take a decision there is a
kind of
asymmetry and the asymmetry allies
arises from the fact that if you act
let's say if you had acted in 1938 to
prevent uh Hitler's takeover of of
Czechoslovakia there would have been a
cost the war would have begun earlier
and uh even if you had successfully
prevented a much larger War the world
war that broke out in 1939 you would
have got no real gratitude
for that you you get no payoffs for the
averted catastrophe you you your
preemptive action has a cost and that
you're held responsible for the tempting
thing particularly in a democratic
system is to do nothing hope for the
best because that has a low cost and if
disaster nevertheless happens if you're
unlucky then you you say to yourself
well anybody in my position would have
made the same error so the cost of
preemption is high and you have to take
a decision conjecturally because you
can't know that in acting in 1938 you
avert a much larger and more dangerous
War you cannot have that certainty and
there are no data that will tell you so
I think decision- making under
uncertainty is the hardest thing of all
but it has to be done and I think what
I've learned from Kissinger is that you
will be held responsible and judged very
harshly for those actions you take uh
even if they they avert disaster you
won't get thanked nobody ever will thank
Henry Kissinger for avoiding World War
III uh uh no nobody will I think ever
thank any Statesman for avoiding
Calamity they will only blame them for
the actions that they took and here's
the final point that Kissinger makes
most choices in the realm of Power are
between evils you just have to decide
which is the greater and which is the
Lesser there are very frequently no good
options I think that's very clear today
in the Middle East since uh we're
talking at a time of of of fresh
disaster in that region there are no
good choices facing the Israeli
government or even the government of the
United States but there's no option to
do nothing I think that must be clear
let me take apart what you just said and
so the first thing you brought up is
that Oppenheimer flirted with let's call
it radical left
utopianism now that's very interesting
because I would say that's true of
intellectuals across the west and has
been since the what I don't know the
last 100 years and it's certainly
something that characterizes the
Academia Academia at the moment I mean
Larry Summers came out two days ago the
former president of Harvard savaging
Harvard as a consequence of its descent
into this radical leftist statist
utopian Vision so there's something key
to
the presumptive presumption of the
intellect and belief in a state imposed
Utopia so that's one thing then you said
sequence of things that were very very
complicated the first was well in
inaction also produces a combinatorial
explosion so we're stuck with the
necessity of action so that's a big
problem that brings up the issue again
is then under what conditions is action
appropriate then you
said you're also not rewarded
for preventative action because in part
because nobody can tell what you
prevented if it doesn't happen right and
so there's no public virtue in that and
that that entices the the the leaders of
modern states to forestall action
because they'll be blamed for action and
then maybe to react precipitously once
it's too late so then again we're back
to the we're back to the central
question here at least in part which
is how do
you how do you organize your attention
and sequence your action so that
overreach is least likely now you you
discussed Kissinger in that regard and
said that you know he was constantly
choosing between evils and and regarded
that as a necessity of States
craft you have to conduct
yourself we talked earlier about this
idea that you know that there's a
tremendous moral hazard in praying in
public and signaling virtue to yourself
and demanding recognition for your
positive actions and you said that
prevention doesn't
produce public
claim that what that has to mean at
least in part is that you have to be
oriented to act properly
despite just fite its reputational
advantage or cost right see that's
exactly it is that something other than
reputation has to motivate your action
and then the question is what should
motivate your action if it's not status
power and reputation right that's
exactly right that's where that should
Eno PA Eno PA said all political careers
end in Failure uh I think that any
leader should reconcile himself or
herself to ultimate failure because
doing the right thing averting disaster
will not get you rewarded uh and I think
this is just to so then why bother why
bother doing the right thing and how do
you even determine what the right thing
is if it's not associated with public
Acclaim what would right be because it
must have ultimately been right for
Churchill to speak out against aasman as
he did throughout the 1930s to take the
helm in 1940 when all his predictions
had been fulfilled and Britain had been
brought to the brink of catastrophe to
lead Britain uh to an ultimate victory
in 1945 and then suffer a massive
electoral defeat this is a noble story
and uh I think that's that's what any
leader should aspire to to be right to
be right on the basis of historical
judgment to accept that there will not
necessarily be triumphal processions
that there may in fact be ignon at the
end of the road but to have done the
right thing to save your nation and get
no thanks for it that seems to be the
most that any leader can aspar to okay
okay okay well I've got I've got two
comments about that and then we'll wrap
this part of the interview out I
understand that you have a hard
out you describ Churchill's actions in
terms of ultimate right and so you made
reference to a concept of ultimate right
and then you turn to a particular
concept of ultimate right which was a
form of extreme self-sacrifice with no
public Acclaim I got to say those are
strange things for someone who also said
during the same discussion who
proclaimed a kind of central atheism
because I can't help seeing echoes in
that of while the Christian passion for
example is that you're called upon to do
right at your own expense even your own
ultimate expense with no hope of public
Acclaim and you do that in the service
of some of something that's ultimately
right and
so let me well that's a parallel that
that occurred to me when you made the
shre observation I'm a lapsed atheist
Jordan I go to church every Sunday uh
precisely because having been brought up
an atheist I came to realize in my
career as an historian not only that
atheism is a disastrous basis for a
society Atheist Societies have probably
committed more violations of human
rights than any others uh but also
because I don't think it can be a basis
for individual uh ethical
decisionmaking uh Churchill was a
Christian and I think has to be
understood as such so I I am a lapsed
atheist and and proud of
it ah okay well you know it turns out I
wanted to talk to you for the additional
half an hour that I usually use but
that's actually just a perfectly fine
place to bring this part of the
conversation to an end and I would be
more than happy to talk to you again in
some greater detail there's obviously
many other things that we could explore
for everyone watching and listening most
of you know that I'm going to continue
to talk to Dr Ferguson on The Daily wire
I want to understand more deeply where
his interest in such interests in such
topics arose during the course of his
life I usually use an autobiographical
approach um in that half an hour so if
those of you who are watching and
listening would like to join us on the
daily wire side that would be great
otherwise Neil thank you very much for a
very stimulating conversation thank you
to everyone who's who's paid attention
and devoted some time to walking through
this podcast with us thanks
[Music]
jul